React Fastify Postgresql (#1302)
oktadeveloper/okta-blog: _source/_posts/2022-09-08-react-fastify-postgres.md

---
layout: blog_post
title: ""
author: gabi-dombrowski
by: contractor
communities: [javascript]
description: ""
tags: []
tweets:
- ""
- ""
- ""
image:

> type: conversion

Reviewer: ```suggestion
github: https://github.com/oktadev/okta-react-fastify-progres-example
type: conversion
```

Repo doesn't exist yet, but that's where it will be

---

In this tutorial, we'll set up an app to help us keep track of what NASA facilities we've visited and which ones we still want to visit.

Our app will be a monorepo with Okta authentication using React for the frontend and Fastify for the backend. [Fastify](https://www.fastify.io/) is a highly performant web framework with low overhead that we'll connect to a Postgresql database. We'll also use [Lerna](https://lerna.js.org/) to manage the frontend and backend apps in a monorepo.

**Prerequisites**

> *Create React App* currently requires Node >= 14.0.0 and npm >= 5.6. The latest required versions can be found at [https://reactjs.org/docs/create-a-new-react-app.html](https://reactjs.org/docs/create-a-new-react-app.html).

Reviewer: I think we should add Docker here too

{% include toc.md %}

## Add authentication using OAuth2 and OpenID Connect (OIDC)

> For this demo app, we'll be using [Okta's SPA redirect model](https://developer.okta.com/docs/guides/sign-into-spa-redirect/react/main/) to authenticate and fetch user info.

Reviewer: I think we should add some phrasing about creating the project directory, such as `okta-react-fastify`

{% include setup/cli.md type="spa" framework="React" loginRedirectUri="http://localhost:3001/login/callback" %}

## Setup the Postgresql Docker instance

> We'll begin by setting up a Docker instance for our Postgresql database. If you haven't already, make sure to [install Docker](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll begin by setting up a Docker instance for our PostgreSQL database. If you haven't already, make sure to [install Docker](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/).
```

> 1. In your root directory, create a file `docker-compose.yml`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In your project's root directory, create a file `docker-compose.yml`:
```

> ```text

Reviewer: This isn't rendering correctly. I think missing vertical space?

Also, let's change the codeblock to yml

services:
  postgres:
    container_name: "nasa-facilities"
    image: "postgres:latest"
    ports:
      - "5432:5432"
    environment:
      POSTGRES_USERNAME: "${POSTGRES_USERNAME}"
      POSTGRES_PASSWORD: "${POSTGRES_PASSWORD}"
      POSTGRES_DB: "${POSTGRES_DB}"
```

2. Create a `.env` file with the following:

> ```text

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```yml
```

POSTGRES_USERNAME=postgres
POSTGRES_PASSWORD=postgres
POSTGRES_DB=nasa-facilities
```

3. To use the Docker configuration we created, run `docker compose up`.

> 4. There is a provided Postgreql data dump `./nasa-facilities_20200910.sql` in the example repo. You can import it by running the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. There is a provided PostgreSQL data dump `./nasa-facilities_20200910.sql` in the example repo. You can import it by running the following:
```

I'm thinking we should link the file here too for ease (probably the raw version)

Author: @alisaduncan The file is over 500 lines. I could shorten it to about 66 lines and add a note that the full dataset is included in the demo repo if you think that makes sense.

Reviewer: Oh, i didn't mean to include the file in the post. I meant to add a link to the raw file within the repo.

Author: Ok, once the demo repo is created, I will add a link 👍

```bash
docker exec -i nasa-facilities psql -U postgres nasa-facilities < ./nasa-facilities_20200910.sql
```

> Your Docker instance is now created and running a Postgresql database with the restored data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your Docker instance is now created and running a PostgreSQL database with the restored data.
```

> **NOTE:** The Postgresql dump included in the demo repo uses data from [https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/nasa/nasa-facilities](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/nasa/nasa-facilities). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**NOTE:** The PostgreSQL dump included in the demo repo uses data from [https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/nasa/nasa-facilities](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/nasa/nasa-facilities). 
```

---
layout: blog_post
title: ""
author: gabi-dombrowski
by: contractor
communities: [javascript]
description: ""

> tags: []

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tags: [react, typescript, fastify, authentication, javascript]
```

tweets:
- ""
- ""
- ""
image:
type: conversion
---

In this tutorial, we'll set up an app to help us keep track of what NASA facilities we've visited and which ones we still want to visit.

Our app will be a monorepo with Okta authentication using React for the frontend and Fastify for the backend. [Fastify](https://www.fastify.io/) is a highly performant web framework with low overhead that we'll connect to a PostgreSQL database. We'll also use [Lerna](https://lerna.js.org/) to manage the frontend and backend apps in a monorepo.

**Prerequisites**

> *Create React App* currently requires Node >= 14.0.0 and npm >= 5.6. The latest required versions can be found at [https://reactjs.org/docs/create-a-new-react-app.html](https://reactjs.org/docs/create-a-new-react-app.html).

Reviewer: I had an issue where running the `create-react-app` was failing the first time (but it generated the `package.json`). I'd delete the `package.json`, and try running it again and it works. 😖 Apparently, this is because of my npm version??? I think we might need to add something about this (or add an upper limit to the version)
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/72928789/why-does-create-react-app-give-missing-dependencies-in-package-json-message

Author: What version of npm were you on? `18.12.1` & `19.0.1` don't seem to have an issue. Those are the LTS and current release versions.

Reviewer: I'm running npm v 8.15, but my node version is 16.

We need to explicitly state which versions of Node and npm were used then. Because my version matches the criteria required for the `create-react-app` as documented in the post.

Author: I added this line, let me know if it doesn't suffice:

`This tutorial was created using Node v18.8.1 and npm v8.11.0.`

A [Docker installation](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/) is required as well.

{% include toc.md %}

### Set up OAuth2 and OpenID Connect (OIDC)

We'll be using [Okta's SPA redirect model](https://developer.okta.com/docs/guides/sign-into-spa-redirect/react/main/) to authenticate.

> {% include setup/cli.md type="spa" framework="React" loginRedirectUri="http://localhost:3001/login/callback" %}

Reviewer: This generates text that isn't accurate. I checked with the team, and apparently, this snippet assumes the callback location path not to have 2 segments. So I think it should either be `loginRedirectUri="http://localhost:3001/callback"` or you'll need to add another parameter to this include for the logout redirect. It's probably easier to add the second parameter instead of changing your code sample and tutorial, but up to you.

Reviewer: Oh, and probably need a callout to take note of the Client ID and Issuer since we'll need those values here in a bit.

Author: I actually went ahead and updated the redirect URI to use `/callback`.

## Setup Lerna for monorepo management 

> [Lerna](****LINK***) is a tool used to manage multi-package repositories. In this project, it'll allow us to have a single repository where both our frontend and API packages live.

Reviewer: Linky please

1. If you don't already have `npx` installed, you can run `npm i npx` to do so.

2. Create a project root directory named `okta-react-fastify`.

3. Add Lerna to your project by running the following in your project root directory:
```bash
npx lerna@latest init
```

4. Create the `frontend` and `api` packages:
```bash
cd packages
mkdir frontend api
```

**NOTE:** The team behind [Nx](https://nx.dev/) now manages Lerna, so if you'd like to integrate Nx's additional robust, scalable, and faster tooling for managing monorepos, check out their documentation on [integrating Nx and Lerna](https://nx.dev/recipes/adopting-nx/lerna-and-nx).

## Add needed Fastify backend and React frontend dependencies with Typescript

1. In `packages/api`, run:
```bash
npm init fastify
```

2. Add the required backend packages:

> ```bash

Reviewer: Is there a way to pin to a version in the command? We should pin versions as much as possible.

npx lerna add @fastify/postgres packages/api
npx lerna add dotenv packages/api
npx lerna add @okta/jwt-verifier packages/api
npx lerna add pg packages/api
```

3. Add Typescript and needed types to the backend repository:
```bash
npx lerna add @types/pg packages/api --dev
npx lerna add typescript packages/api --dev
```

4. Next, let's create a basic React application using [Create React App](https://github.com/facebook/create-react-app). We'll use the template for Typescript with it as well. In the created `packages/frontend` directory, run:
```bash
npx create-react-app . --template typescript
```

5. Add the frontend Okta dependencies:

> ```bash

Reviewer: We definitely need to pin Okta lib versions (although we should pin all deps. I didn't call out the ones above)

npx lerna add @okta/okta-auth-js packages/frontend
npx lerna add @okta/okta-react packages/frontend
npx lerna add react-router-dom packages/frontend
```

6. You can now run `npx lerna bootstrap` to install your package dependencies.

**NOTE:** Our demo repository uses React `^18.2.0` and React Scripts `5.0.1`.

## Setup the PostgreSQL Docker instance

1. In your project's root directory, create a file `docker-compose.yml`:
{% raw %}
```yml
services:
  postgres:
    container_name: "nasa-facilities"
    image: "postgres:latest"
    ports:
      - "5432:5432"
    environment:
      POSTGRES_USERNAME: "${POSTGRES_USERNAME}"
      POSTGRES_PASSWORD: "${POSTGRES_PASSWORD}"
      POSTGRES_DB: "${POSTGRES_DB}"
```
{% endraw %}

{:start="2"}
2. Create a `.env` file in the same project root directory and add the following:
```yml
POSTGRES_USERNAME=postgres
POSTGRES_PASSWORD=postgres
POSTGRES_DB=nasa-facilities
```

3. To use the Docker configuration we created, run `docker compose up`.

> 4. There is a provided Postgreql data dump `./nasa-facilities_20200910.sql` in the example repo. You can import it by running the following from the project root directory:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. There is a provided PostgreSql data dump `./nasa-facilities_20200910.sql` in the example repo. You can import it by running the following from the project root directory:
```

Author: Added as `PostgreSQL`.

```bash
docker exec -i nasa-facilities psql -U postgres nasa-facilities < ./nasa-facilities_20200910.sql
```

Your Docker instance is now created and running a PostgreSQL database with the restored data.

**NOTE:** The PostgreSQL dump included in the demo repo uses data from [https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/nasa/nasa-facilities](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/nasa/nasa-facilities).

## Create the API backend app using Fastify

> 1. Go to your backend repository root directory at `packages/api`.

Reviewer: IMO we want to clarify this step is for the commandline so there's no confusion for those who might be using an IDE at this point.

2. Update `package.json` by adding the following to allow the backend application to compile using Typescript:
```json
{
  "main": "build/index.js",
  "scripts": {
    "start": "tsc && node build/index.js"
  }
}
```

3. Initialize a Typescript config file by running:
```bash

> npx tsc --init

Reviewer: The initial config is missing the `outDir` setting that the start script relies on. Would you mind adding that step in?

```

4. Create a `.env` file with the following:
```yml
CONNECTION_STRING=PostgreSQL://postgres:postgres@localhost:5432/nasa-facilities
OKTA_ISSUER=https://{yourOktaDomain}/oauth2/default
OKTA_CLIENT_ID={yourOktaClientId}
OKTA_AUDIENCE="api://default"

> ```

Reviewer: Would you mind adding a step or a callout to replace the Okta values with the output from the CLI?

        values: [id],
      };

      try {
        await client.query(query);
        reply.code(204);
      } catch (error) {
        const errorMessage = (error as Error).message;
        throw new Error(errorMessage);
      }
    }
  );
}

export default facilitiesRoutes;

```

{:start="7"}
7. To register these routes with our Fastify instance, add the following to `index.ts`:
```ts
fastify.register(facilitiesRoutes);
```

**NOTE:** Don't forget to also import the `facilitiesRoutes` after adding the above line.

{:start="8"}
8. Then we'll create a `utils/jwt-verifier.ts` file that will include logic to verify the Okta ID tokens included in API calls from the frontend:

```ts
import OktaJwtVerifier from "@okta/jwt-verifier";
import dotenv from "dotenv";
import { FastifyReply, FastifyRequest } from "fastify";

dotenv.config();

const oktaJwtVerifier = new OktaJwtVerifier({
  issuer: process.env.OKTA_ISSUER || "",
  clientId: process.env.OKTA_CLIENT_ID,
});

const audience = process.env.OKTA_AUDIENCE;

export const jwtVerifier = async (
  request: FastifyRequest,
  reply: FastifyReply
) => {
  const { authorization } = request.headers;

  request.log.info({ authorization });

>   const [token] = authorization?.trim().split(" ") || "";

Reviewer: oh! This should have `Bearer` prepending the token. Would it be possible to change this (and update the code in tutorial/sample)? At least it looks like it's missing looking at this. Feel free to correct me.

Author: @alisaduncan I had it like this initially, but the `jwtVerifier` on the backend looks like it's expecting only the token without `Bearer `. Will I just need to remove the `Bearer ` when doing the JWT verify on the backend?

Reviewer: yes, you'll need to remove `Bearer ` when doing the JWT verification on the backend. Here's an Express API quickstart with this step if you want to grab the code
https://github.com/okta-samples/okta-express-js-api-quickstart/blob/main/server.js

  request.log.info({ token });

  if (!authorization || !token) {
    reply.code(401).send();
  }

  try {
    const { claims } = await oktaJwtVerifier.verifyAccessToken(
      token,
      audience || ""
    );

    request.log.info({ claims });

    if (!claims) {
      reply.code(401).send();
    }
  } catch (err) {
    console.log(err);
    reply.code(401).send();
  }
};

```

{:start="9"}
9. We'll then add a [Fastify Prehandler Hook](https://www.fastify.io/docs/latest/Reference/Hooks/#prehandler) to `index.ts` that will run the `jwtVerifier` logic with each Fastify route:

```ts
fastify.decorate("jwtVerify", (request: FastifyRequest) => {
  fastify.log.info(`The incoming request is: ${JSON.stringify(request)}`);
});

fastify.addHook("preHandler", async (request, reply, done) => {
  return jwtVerifier(request, reply);
});
```

**NOTE:** An import will also need to be added for ```jwtVerifier`.

Your final `packages/api/index.ts` file should look like this:

> ```bash

Reviewer: Can this be `ts`?

          statusCode: reply.statusCode,
        };
      },
      req(request) {
        return {
          method: request.method,
          url: request.url,
        };
      },
    },
  },
});

fastify.register(fastifyPostgres, {
  connectionString: process.env.CONNECTION_STRING,
});

fastify.decorate("jwtVerify", (request: FastifyRequest) => {
  fastify.log.info(`The incoming request is: ${JSON.stringify(request)}`);
});

fastify.addHook("preHandler", async (request, reply, done) => {
  return jwtVerifier(request, reply);
});

fastify.register(facilitiesRoutes);

const start = async () => {
  try {
    await fastify.listen({ port: 3000 });
  } catch (err) {
    fastify.log.error(err);
    process.exit(1);
  }
};
start();

```

## Configure the React app

1. Add `"proxy": "http://localhost:3000"` to `packages/frontend/package.json` so that React knows what base URL our API calls will need to make.

2. In a `.env` file in the `packages/frontend` directory, add the needed environment variables:
```yml
PORT=3001
REACT_APP_OKTA_ISSUER=https://{yourOktaDomain}/oauth2/default
REACT_APP_OKTA_CLIENT_ID={yourOktaClientId}
REACT_APP_OKTA_BASE_REDIRECT_URI=http://localhost:3001

> ```

Reviewer: Please add a note or a step to replace the Client ID and Issurer values. TY!

**NOTE:** We are switching the default port React will run on because the backend API app will use port `3000` by default as well.

### Create React components

Let's create our React components for render on the frontend.

1. In a newly created `src/components` directory, add the following files:

#### login.tsx

```tsx
import { useOktaAuth } from "@okta/okta-react";
import { Navigate, useNavigate } from "react-router-dom";
import "../App.css";

export function Login() {
  const navigate = useNavigate();
  const { authState } = useOktaAuth();

  const handleLoginClick = () => {
    navigate("/facilities");
  };

  return authState?.isAuthenticated ? (
    <Navigate to="/facilities" replace />
  ) : (
    <div className="form-wrapper">
      <form onSubmit={handleLoginClick}>
        <h2>Welcome Back!</h2>
        <input type="submit" value="Login" />
      </form>
    </div>
  );
}

```

**NOTE:** Our app uses [React Router v6](https://reactrouter.com/en/main), which utilizes the new `useNavigate` to replace `useHistory` to programmatically navigate.

#### facilities.tsx

```tsx
import { useOktaAuth } from "@okta/okta-react";
import { useEffect, useState } from "react";

> import { getErrorMessage } from "../utils/get-error-message";

Reviewer: The code for this is missing in the tut. It might be easier to add it as a function in this file, though (that's what I did instead of creating the folder and file. That's like 3 clicks! 😉 )

Author: I also did that at some point but it must have been in a parallel timeline 😅

}

function Facilities() {
  const [data, setData] = useState<IFacility[]>();
  const [errors, setErrors] = useState<string>();
  const { authState, oktaAuth } = useOktaAuth();

  const logout = async () => {
    try {
      await oktaAuth.signOut();
    } catch (err) {
      throw err;
    }
  };

  useEffect(() => {
    const apiCall = async () => {
      if (authState?.isAuthenticated && authState.accessToken?.accessToken) {
        try {
          const response = await fetch("/facilities", {
            headers: {
              Authorization: authState.accessToken.accessToken,
            },
          });
          const data = await response.json();
          setData(data);
        } catch (error: unknown) {
          setErrors(getErrorMessage(error));
        }
      }
    };
    apiCall();
  }, [authState]);

  const handleVisitedClick = (
    e: React.ChangeEvent<HTMLInputElement>,
    facilityId: bigint
  ) => {
    const url = `/facilities/${facilityId}`;

    const apiCall = async () => {
      if (authState?.isAuthenticated && authState.accessToken?.accessToken) {
        try {
          await fetch(url, {
            method: "PATCH",
            headers: {

>               Authorization: authState.accessToken?.accessToken,

Reviewer: Ok, yeah. All the places where the Authorization header is set should include Bearer token.
`Authorization: Bearer <accesstokenblah>`

                      <td>{facility.Facility}</td>
                      <td>{facility.Status}</td>
                      <td>{facility.City}</td>
                      <td>{facility.State}</td>
                      <td>
                        <input
                          type="checkbox"
                          defaultChecked={facility.Visited}
                          onChange={(e) => handleVisitedClick(e, facility.id)}
                        />
                      </td>
                      <td>
                        <button
                          className="button-delete"
                          onClick={() => handleDeleteClick(facility.id)}
                        >
                          DELETE
                        </button>
                      </td>
                    </tr>
                  );
                })}
            </tbody>
          </table>
        ) : (
          <p>No facilities found</p>
        )}
      </div>
    );
  } else if (errors) {
    return <p>An error occurred: {errors}</p>;
  } else return <p className="loading">Loading...</p>;
}

export default Facilities;

```

#### secureRoute.tsx

> In this file we'll create a custom `SecureRoute` component to work with React Router v6.

Reviewer: 🔥 

Thanks for showing an example of this!!

  grid-column: 2;
  grid-row: 2;
  display: grid;
  grid-gap: 10px;
  margin: auto 0;
  padding: 16px 32px;
  background-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.9);
  border-radius: 10px;
  box-shadow: 0 32px 64px rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.2);
  margin-bottom: 33%;
}

form fieldset {
  margin: 0;
  background-color: #fff;
  border: none;
  border-radius: 5px;
  box-shadow: 0 1px 3px rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.2);
}

legend {
  padding: 4px;
  background-color: #fff;
  border-radius: 5px;
}

form > input,
button {
  padding: 10px;
  border: 1px solid rgba(0, 0, 0, 0);
  border-radius: 5px;
  background: #fff;
  box-shadow: 0 1px 3px rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.2);
  cursor: pointer;
  margin-bottom: 24px;
  min-width: 100px;
}

form > input:hover,
button:hover {
  background-color: #eef;
}

.logout-button {
  align-self: end;
  margin: 32px 32px 0px;
}

input[type="checkbox"] {
  width: 48px;
  height: 20px;
  cursor: pointer;
}

@keyframes Gradient {
  0% {
    background-position: 0% 50%;
  }
  50% {
    background-position: 100% 50%;
  }
  100% {
    background-position: 0% 50%;
  }
}

button.button-delete {
  background-color: #fe2c54;
  color: white;
  font-weight: 700;
  margin-bottom: 0;
  min-width: unset;
}

```

> ## Running the app

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Running the React, Fastify, and PostgreSQL project
```

You can start the demo app by running `npx lerna run start`.

{% img blog/react-fastify-postgres/login-screen.jpg alt:"Screenshot of login window" width:"600" %}{: .center-image }

If we're not authenticated, our app will land us at the login page. Here, we click login to go through the Okta login process. Once authenticated, we're redirected to `/facilities`. If we land on the root URL and are already authenticated, our app will automatically navigate us to `/facilities`. Once our table loads, we'll see the following:

{% img blog/react-fastify-postgres/nasa-facilities-table.jpg alt:"Screenshot of table with nasa facilities data" width:"600" %}{: .center-image }

> To render the facilities table, our app has made a call to our API which includes the ID token authorization to fetch the data from the backend `/facilities` API endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To render the facilities table, our app has made a call to our API which includes the Access token to fetch the data from the backend `/facilities` API endpoint.
```

In `packages/frontend/facilities.tsx`:

> ```bash

Reviewer: Can this be changed to `tsx`?

  useEffect(() => {
    const apiCall = async () => {
      if (authState?.isAuthenticated && authState.accessToken?.accessToken) {
        try {
          const response = await fetch("/facilities", {
            headers: {
              Authorization: authState.accessToken.accessToken,
            },
          });
          const data = await response.json();
          setData(data);
        } catch (error: unknown) {
          setErrors(getErrorMessage(error));
        }
      }
    };
    apiCall();
  }, [authState]);
```

The backend has verified the ID token using the `jwtVerifier` utility we created.

The backend connects to our PostgreSQL instance and has used the query we specified to fetch the needed data at the `/facilities` route.

In `packages/api/routes/facilities.ts`:

> ```bash

Reviewer: Can this be `ts`?

fastify.get(
    "/facilities",
    async (request: FastifyRequest, reply: FastifyReply) => {
      let facilities: IFacility[] = [];

      try {
        const { rows } = await client.query("SELECT * FROM facilities");
        if (rows.length == 0) throw new Error("No facilities found");

        facilities = rows;
        reply
          .code(200)
          .header("Content-Type", "application/json; charset=utf-8")
          .send([...facilities]);
      } catch (error) {
        const errorMessage = (error as Error).message;
        throw new Error(errorMessage);
      }
    }
  );
```

The same process repeats when a user clicks on the `Visited` checkbox or `Delete` button for the appropriate API endpoints and PostgreSQL queries.

> ## Further learning

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Learn more about React, Fastify, and Authentication
```

**[Handling CORS Errors in Fastify](https://github.com/fastify/fastify-cors)**

> **[Secure Your PostgreSQL Instance](https://www.PostgreSQL.org/docs/7.0/security.htm)**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**[Secure Your PostgreSQL Instance](https://www.PostgreSQL.org/docs/7.0/security.htm)**

**[Use Redux to Manage Authenticated State in a React App](/blog/2022/08/29/react-typescript-redux)**

** [A Developer's Guide to Session Management in React](/blog/2021/06/16/session-mgmt-react)**

Be sure you follow us on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/oktadev) and subscribe to our [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/c/oktadev) channel. Please comment below if you have any questions or want to share what tutorial you’d like to see next.
```

---
layout: blog_post

> title: ""

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "How to Build a Secure React and Fastify API App"
```

author: gabi-dombrowski
by: contractor
communities: [javascript]

> description: ""

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: "This tutorial demonstrates how to create a complete web application project with security built in from the ground up. You'll create a React frontend and Fastify API backend using TypeScript, use Docker to run PostgreSQL, add authentication to secure the frontend and API, and manage the project in a Lerna monorepo. "
```

tags: [react, typescript, fastify, authentication, javascript]
tweets:

> - ""

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- "Create a complete web application project with security built in from the ground up in this tutorial using React, Fastify, and PostgreSQL! "
```

Please remove the rest of the tweet string placeholders. I'll just add the one.

---
layout: blog_post
title: "How to Build a Secure React and Fastify API App"
author: gabi-dombrowski
by: contractor
communities: [javascript]
description: "This tutorial demonstrates how to create a complete web application project with security built in from the ground up. You'll create a React frontend and Fastify API backend using TypeScript, use Docker to run PostgreSQL, add authentication to secure the frontend and API, and manage the project in a Lerna monorepo. "
tags: [react, typescript, fastify, authentication, javascript]
tweets:
- "Create a complete web application project with security built in from the ground up in this tutorial using React, Fastify, and PostgreSQL! "
image: blog/react-fastify-postgres/social.jpg

> type: conversion

Reviewer: ```suggestion
type: conversion
github: https://github.com/oktadev/okta-react-fastify-postgresql-example
```

        }
      }
    };
    apiCall();
  }, [authState]);
```

The backend has verified the ID token using the `jwtVerifier` utility we created.

The backend connects to our PostgreSQL instance and has used the query we specified to fetch the needed data at the `/facilities` route.

In `packages/api/routes/facilities.ts`:
```ts
fastify.get(
    "/facilities",
    async (request: FastifyRequest, reply: FastifyReply) => {
      let facilities: IFacility[] = [];

      try {
        const { rows } = await client.query("SELECT * FROM facilities");
        if (rows.length == 0) throw new Error("No facilities found");

        facilities = rows;
        reply
          .code(200)
          .header("Content-Type", "application/json; charset=utf-8")
          .send([...facilities]);
      } catch (error) {
        const errorMessage = (error as Error).message;
        throw new Error(errorMessage);
      }
    }
  );
```

The same process repeats when a user clicks on the `Visited` checkbox or `Delete` button for the appropriate API endpoints and PostgreSQL queries.

## Further learning

**[Handling CORS Errors in Fastify](https://github.com/fastify/fastify-cors)**

> **[Secure Your PostgreSQL Instance](https://www.PostgreSQL.org/docs/7.0/security.htm)**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**[Secure Your PostgreSQL Instance](https://www.PostgreSQL.org/docs/7.0/security.htm)**

**[Use Redux to Manage Authenticated State in a React App](/blog/2022/08/29/react-typescript-redux)**

** [A Developer's Guide to Session Management in React](/blog/2021/06/16/session-mgmt-react)**

Be sure you follow us on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/oktadev) and subscribe to our [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/c/oktadev) channel. Please comment below if you have any questions or want to share what tutorial you’d like to see next.
```

---
layout: blog_post
title: "How to Build a Secure React and Fastify API App"
author: gabi-dombrowski
by: contractor
communities: [javascript]

> description: "This tutorial demonstrates how to create a complete web application project with security built in from the ground up. You'll create a React frontend and Fastify API backend using TypeScript, use Docker to run PostgreSQL, add authentication to secure the frontend and API, and manage the project in a Lerna monorepo. "

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: "In this tutorial, you'll create a complete web application with security built in from the ground up. The project features a React frontend and a Fastify API backend, managed in a Lerna monorepo. "
```
Recommended character count for this field is 150-160 char, so I trimmed it down to 200: https://blog.bit.ai/meta-description-length/

tags: [react, typescript, fastify, authentication, javascript]
tweets:
- "Create a complete web application project with security built in from the ground up in this tutorial using React, Fastify, and PostgreSQL! "
image: blog/react-fastify-postgres/social.jpg
type: conversion
github: https://github.com/oktadev/okta-react-fastify-postgresql-example
---

> In this tutorial, we'll set up an app to help us keep track of what NASA facilities we've visited and which ones we still want to visit.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) is an independent agency of the US federal government, responsible for space exploration and research, with field facilities across the United States. In this tutorial, we'll set up an app to keep track of what NASA facilities we've visited and which ones we still want to check out. 
```
adding context

> Our app will be a monorepo with Okta authentication using React for the frontend and Fastify for the backend. [Fastify](https://www.fastify.io/) is a highly performant web framework with low overhead that we'll connect to a PostgreSQL database. We'll also use [Lerna](https://lerna.js.org/) to manage the frontend and backend apps in a monorepo.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Our app will be a [monorepo](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monorepo) with Okta authentication, using React for the frontend and Fastify for the backend. [Fastify](https://www.fastify.io/) is a highly performant web framework with low overhead that we'll connect to a PostgreSQL database. We'll also use [Lerna](https://lerna.js.org/) to manage the frontend and backend apps in a monorepo.
```
added link

{% include setup/cli.md type="spa" framework="React" loginRedirectUri="http://localhost:3001/callback" %}

**NOTE:** Take note of your client ID and issuer as this will be used in a subsequent step.

## Setup Lerna for monorepo management 

[Lerna](https://lerna.js.org/) is a tool used to manage multi-package repositories. In this project, it'll allow us to have a single repository where both our frontend and API packages live.

1. If you don't already have `npx` installed, you can run `npm i npx` to do so.

2. Create a project root directory named `okta-react-fastify`.

3. Add Lerna to your project by running the following in your project root directory:
```bash
npx lerna@latest init
```

4. Create the `frontend` and `api` packages:
```bash
cd packages
mkdir frontend api
```

**NOTE:** The team behind [Nx](https://nx.dev/) now manages Lerna, so if you'd like to integrate Nx's additional robust, scalable, and faster tooling for managing monorepos, check out their documentation on [integrating Nx and Lerna](https://nx.dev/recipes/adopting-nx/lerna-and-nx).

> ## Add needed Fastify backend and React frontend dependencies with Typescript

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Add needed Fastify backend and React frontend dependencies with TypeScript
```
camel case

1. In `packages/api`, run:
```bash
npm init fastify
```

2. Add the required backend packages:
```bash
npx lerna add @fastify/postgres@5.1.0 packages/api
npx lerna add dotenv@16.0.2 packages/api
npx lerna add @okta/jwt-verifier@2.6.0 packages/api
npx lerna add pg@8.8.0 packages/api
```

> 3. Add Typescript and needed types to the backend repository:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Add TypeScript and needed types to the backend repository:
```

```bash
npx lerna add @types/pg@8.6.5 packages/api --dev
npx lerna add typescript@4.8.3 packages/api --dev
```

> 4. Next, let's create a basic React application using [Create React App](https://github.com/facebook/create-react-app). We'll use the template for Typescript with it as well. In the created `packages/frontend` directory, run:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Next, let's create a basic React application using [Create React App](https://github.com/facebook/create-react-app). We'll use the template for TypeScript with it as well. In the created `packages/frontend` directory, run:
```

```bash
npx create-react-app . --template typescript
```

5. Add the frontend Okta dependencies:
```bash
npx lerna add @okta/okta-auth-js@7.0.1 packages/frontend
npx lerna add @okta/okta-react@6.7.0 packages/frontend
```

6. You can now run `npx lerna bootstrap` to install your package dependencies.

**NOTE:** Our demo repository uses React `^18.2.0` and React Scripts `5.0.1`.

> ## Setup the PostgreSQL Docker instance

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Set up the PostgreSQL Docker instance
```
two words as a verb....

1. In your project's root directory, create a file `docker-compose.yml`:
{% raw %}
```yml
services:
  postgres:
    container_name: "nasa-facilities"
    image: "postgres:latest"
    ports:
      - "5432:5432"
    environment:
      POSTGRES_USERNAME: "${POSTGRES_USERNAME}"
      POSTGRES_PASSWORD: "${POSTGRES_PASSWORD}"
      POSTGRES_DB: "${POSTGRES_DB}"
```
{% endraw %}

{:start="2"}
2. Create a `.env` file in the same project root directory and add the following:
```yml
POSTGRES_USERNAME=postgres
POSTGRES_PASSWORD=postgres
POSTGRES_DB=nasa-facilities
```

3. To use the Docker configuration we created, run `docker compose up`.

4. There is a provided PostgrSQL data dump `./nasa-facilities_20200910.sql` [in the example repo](https://github.com/oktadev/okta-react-fastify-postgresql-example/blob/main/nasa-facilities_20200910.sql). You can import it by running the following from the project root directory:
```bash
docker exec -i nasa-facilities psql -U postgres nasa-facilities < ./nasa-facilities_20200910.sql
```

> Your Docker instance is now created and running a PostgreSQL database with the restored data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Your newly created Docker instance is now running a PostgreSQL database with the restored data.
```

**NOTE:** The PostgreSQL dump included in the demo repo uses data from [https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/nasa/nasa-facilities](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/nasa/nasa-facilities).

## Create the API backend app using Fastify

1. In the command line, go to your backend repository root directory at `packages/api`.

> 2. Update `package.json` by adding the following to allow the backend application to compile using Typescript:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Update `package.json` by adding the following to allow the backend application to compile using TypeScript:
```

        text: `UPDATE public.facilities SET 
                "Visited" = COALESCE($1, "Visited")
                WHERE id = $2`,
        values: [visited, id],
      };

      try {
        await client.query(query);
        reply.code(204);
      } catch (error) {
        const errorMessage = (error as Error).message;
        throw new Error(errorMessage);
      }
    }
  );

  fastify.delete(
    "/facilities/:id",
    async (request: FastifyRequest, reply: FastifyReply) => {
      const { id } = request.params as { id: bigint };

      const query = {
        text: `DELETE FROM public.facilities
                  WHERE id = $1 RETURNING *`,
        values: [id],
      };

      try {
        await client.query(query);
        reply.code(204);
      } catch (error) {
        const errorMessage = (error as Error).message;
        throw new Error(errorMessage);
      }
    }
  );
}

export default facilitiesRoutes;

```

{:start="8"}
8. To register these routes with our Fastify instance, add the following to `index.ts`:
```ts
fastify.register(facilitiesRoutes);
```

**NOTE:** Don't forget to also import the `facilitiesRoutes` after adding the above line.

{:start="9"}

> 9. Then we'll create a `utils/jwt-verifier.ts` file that will include logic to verify the Access token included in API calls from the frontend:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
9. Then we'll create a `utils/jwt-verifier.ts` file that will include logic to verify the access token included in API calls from the frontend:
```

  margin-bottom: 33%;
}

form fieldset {
  margin: 0;
  background-color: #fff;
  border: none;
  border-radius: 5px;
  box-shadow: 0 1px 3px rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.2);
}

legend {
  padding: 4px;
  background-color: #fff;
  border-radius: 5px;
}

form > input,
button {
  padding: 10px;
  border: 1px solid rgba(0, 0, 0, 0);
  border-radius: 5px;
  background: #fff;
  box-shadow: 0 1px 3px rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.2);
  cursor: pointer;
  margin-bottom: 24px;
  min-width: 100px;
}

form > input:hover,
button:hover {
  background-color: #eef;
}

.logout-button {
  align-self: end;
  margin: 32px 32px 0px;
}

input[type="checkbox"] {
  width: 48px;
  height: 20px;
  cursor: pointer;
}

@keyframes Gradient {
  0% {
    background-position: 0% 50%;
  }
  50% {
    background-position: 100% 50%;
  }
  100% {
    background-position: 0% 50%;
  }
}

button.button-delete {
  background-color: #fe2c54;
  color: white;
  font-weight: 700;
  margin-bottom: 0;
  min-width: unset;
}

```

## Running the app

You can start the demo app by running `npx lerna run start`.

{% img blog/react-fastify-postgres/login-screen.jpg alt:"Screenshot of login window" width:"600" %}{: .center-image }

> If we're not authenticated, our app will land us at the login page. Here, we click login to go through the Okta login process. Once authenticated, we're redirected to `/facilities`. If we land on the root URL and are already authenticated, our app will automatically navigate us to `/facilities`. Once our table loads, we'll see the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If we're not authenticated, our app will land us at the login page. Here, we click login to go through the Okta login process. Once authenticated, we're redirected to `/facilities`. If we're already authenticated when we land on the root URL, our app will automatically navigate us to `/facilities`. Once our table loads, we'll see the following:
```
clarity / simplicity

{% img blog/react-fastify-postgres/nasa-facilities-table.jpg alt:"Screenshot of table with nasa facilities data" width:"600" %}{: .center-image }

> To render the facilities table, our app has made a call to our API which includes the Access token to fetch the data from the backend `/facilities` API endpoint.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To render the facilities table, our app has made a call to our API which includes the access token to fetch the data from the backend `/facilities` API endpoint.
```

In `packages/frontend/facilities.tsx`:
```tsx
  useEffect(() => {
    const apiCall = async () => {
      if (authState?.isAuthenticated && authState.accessToken?.accessToken) {
        try {
          const response = await fetch("/facilities", {
            headers: {
              Authorization: authState.accessToken.accessToken,
            },
          });
          const data = await response.json();
          setData(data);
        } catch (error: unknown) {
          setErrors(getErrorMessage(error));
        }
      }
    };
    apiCall();
  }, [authState]);
```

> The backend verified the Access token using the `jwtVerifier` utility we created.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The backend verified the access token using the `jwtVerifier` utility we created.
```

        text: `UPDATE public.facilities SET 
                "Visited" = COALESCE($1, "Visited")
                WHERE id = $2`,
        values: [visited, id],
      };

      try {
        await client.query(query);
        reply.code(204);
      } catch (error) {
        const errorMessage = (error as Error).message;
        throw new Error(errorMessage);
      }
    }
  );

  fastify.delete(
    "/facilities/:id",
    async (request: FastifyRequest, reply: FastifyReply) => {
      const { id } = request.params as { id: bigint };

      const query = {
        text: `DELETE FROM public.facilities
                  WHERE id = $1 RETURNING *`,
        values: [id],
      };

      try {
        await client.query(query);
        reply.code(204);
      } catch (error) {
        const errorMessage = (error as Error).message;
        throw new Error(errorMessage);
      }
    }
  );
}

export default facilitiesRoutes;

```

{:start="8"}
8. To register these routes with our Fastify instance, add the following to `index.ts`:
```ts
fastify.register(facilitiesRoutes);
```

**NOTE:** Don't forget to also import the `facilitiesRoutes` after adding the above line.

{:start="9"}

> 9. Then we'll create a `utils/jwt-verifier.ts` file that will include logic to verify the Okta ID tokens included in API calls from the frontend:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
9. Then we'll create a `utils/jwt-verifier.ts` file that will include logic to verify the Access token included in API calls from the frontend:
```

});

const audience = process.env.OKTA_AUDIENCE;

export const jwtVerifier = async (
  request: FastifyRequest,
  reply: FastifyReply
) => {
  const { authorization } = request.headers;

  request.log.info({ authorization });

  const match = authorization?.match(/Bearer (.+)/);

  if (!match) {
    return reply.status(401).send();
  }

  if (!authorization || !match) {
    reply.code(401).send();
  }

  try {
    const accessToken = match[1];
    const { claims } = await oktaJwtVerifier.verifyAccessToken(
      accessToken,
      audience || ""
    );

    request.log.info({ claims });

    if (!claims) {
      reply.code(401).send();
    }
  } catch (err) {
    console.log(err);
    reply.code(401).send();
  }
};

```

{:start="10"}
10. We'll then add a [Fastify Prehandler Hook](https://www.fastify.io/docs/latest/Reference/Hooks/#prehandler) to `index.ts` that will run the `jwtVerifier` logic with each Fastify route:

```ts
fastify.decorate("jwtVerify", (request: FastifyRequest) => {
  fastify.log.info(`The incoming request is: ${JSON.stringify(request)}`);
});

fastify.addHook("preHandler", async (request, reply, done) => {
  return jwtVerifier(request, reply);
});
```

> **NOTE:** An import will also need to be added for ```jwtVerifier`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**NOTE:** An import will also need to be added for `jwtVerifier`.
```

**NOTE:** We are switching the default port React will run on because the backend API app will use port `3000` by default as well.

### Create React components

Let's create our React components for render on the frontend.

1. In a newly created `src/components` directory, add the following files:

#### login.tsx

```tsx
import { useOktaAuth } from "@okta/okta-react";
import { Navigate, useNavigate } from "react-router-dom";
import "../App.css";

export function Login() {
  const navigate = useNavigate();
  const { authState } = useOktaAuth();

  const handleLoginClick = () => {
    navigate("/facilities");
  };

  return authState?.isAuthenticated ? (
    <Navigate to="/facilities" replace />
  ) : (
    <div className="form-wrapper">
      <form onSubmit={handleLoginClick}>
        <h2>Welcome Back!</h2>
        <input type="submit" value="Login" />
      </form>
    </div>
  );
}

```

**NOTE:** Our app uses [React Router v6](https://reactrouter.com/en/main), which utilizes the new `useNavigate` to replace `useHistory` to programmatically navigate.

#### facilities.tsx

```tsx
import { useOktaAuth } from "@okta/okta-react";
import { useEffect, useState } from "react";

> import { getErrorMessage } from "../utils/get-error-message";

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Should be removed now

{% img blog/react-fastify-postgres/nasa-facilities-table.jpg alt:"Screenshot of table with nasa facilities data" width:"600" %}{: .center-image }

To render the facilities table, our app has made a call to our API which includes the Access token to fetch the data from the backend `/facilities` API endpoint.

In `packages/frontend/facilities.tsx`:
```tsx
  useEffect(() => {
    const apiCall = async () => {
      if (authState?.isAuthenticated && authState.accessToken?.accessToken) {
        try {
          const response = await fetch("/facilities", {
            headers: {
              Authorization: authState.accessToken.accessToken,
            },
          });
          const data = await response.json();
          setData(data);
        } catch (error: unknown) {
          setErrors(getErrorMessage(error));
        }
      }
    };
    apiCall();
  }, [authState]);
```

> The backend has verified the ID token using the `jwtVerifier` utility we created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The backend verified the Access token using the `jwtVerifier` utility we created.
```
